---
title: My tattoos bind myself into my body
layout: post
category: chatter
tags: depression, tattoos
---

I had a thought the other day that I ended up putting onto twitter. I've been
thinking a lot lately about my depression and where it leads me, and one thing
that I've noticed is that I start thinking about getting tattoos when I'm
starting to wonder what things would be like if I weren't alive anymore. (I'm
not thinking about killing myself right now--no one needs to worry about that).

<!-- more -->

I'm sure there's a Freudian perspective that for me getting tattoos is an
expression of death drive, and that's probably true to a certain extent. Getting
tattooed is an exercise of extended pain (though very bearable), and it is
'technically' a mutilation of my body. But not all mutilations are bad.

For the record, I sitting here thinking that 'mutilation' isn't the best word,
but it's better than 'defacement' or anything that passes a strong value
judgement on the act. When I say 'mutilation', I'm just meaning that I am
causing physical damage to my body in such a way that it changes its appearance.
Hello, tattoo.

Getting tattoos is about making certain parts of my identity visible when they
might not otherwise be. On my left arm, I have the word "IMMIGRANT" scrawled out
in some combination of arte-nouveau and graffiti script.

{% include image.html
  img="assets/images/post-images/tattoo-left-arm-immigrant-small.jpg"
  caption="IMMIGRANT, my first tattoo"
%}

On my right arm, I have a sleeve in progress filled with images from my home.
It's still going, and is being done by the really great [Jesse
Rodriguez](https://instagram.com/mugs_one).

{% include image.html
  img="assets/images/post-images/tattoo-sleeve-right-arm-both-sides.png"
  caption="A sleeve on my right arm made up of images from my home"
%}

Where some might say that this is a death drive manifesting, for me it feels
like the images bind myself into my body. And when I'm in a moment when I'm not
feeling all that attached to it and like it might be better if I treated it as
disposable, the tattoos give me tangible reasons to love it.

And yea. It might be better if I didn't have to have augmentation to feel like
it's worth sticking around, but on the other hand... it doesn't feel all that
external. The tattoos act as a reminder that my identity is bound in this
material existence[^materialist]. And they bind me to my matter.

I have an image of my head of a few layers of fabric, lain on top of each other,
and able to slide back and forth. When I go off and start thinking that it might
be better if I were dead, it's as if the top layer of fabric is sliding off the
table.

The tattoos are like embroidery that makes a pattern on the bottom fabric
visible on the top layer, and that bind the two pieces of fabric together in
important points. Maybe they move less, but also, it makes something that was
hidden apparent, and lends a lot of strength at that binding point.

I think in the end what I'm trying to say, is that my tattoos make me feel
stronger.


---
[^materialist]: In case you're wondering, I'm a materialist, which is to say I'm pretty sure that all there is to life is the phenomena generated by the weird, strange, and wonderful interactions of our bodily and environmental matter... so no afterlife or nothing.
